content/technical/open-source-as-a-service.md, before:

Title: Your Service is not Open Source
Date: 2018-02-06 18:35
Tags: open source, technical
Slug: open-source-as-a-service
Category: Technical
Summary: Sharing the source code to your SaaS is insufficient. We effectively enable users to contribute to the a running service for it to be Open Source.

Sharing the source code to your SaaS is insufficient to make it
actually be Open Source. Sounds self-contradictory?

Most services that espouse "Open Source", do so by simply
[throwing the code over the wall](https://github.com/travis-ci/travis-ci).
It's better than nothing, but really misses the point that powers
Open Source: enabling users to make a change to the software
they're using.

Some other Open Source services, such as
[GitLab.com](https://about.gitlab.com/community/contribute/development/)
or [ElasticSearch](https://www.elastic.co/about/free-and-open) do include
the tools used to operate/deploy their service. Pause for applause 👏👏👏

But thats is also insufficient to actually enable Open Source.

In order for a user of the service to begin contributing, they must
first deploy and operate their own clone: Something that they explicitly
chose not to do when they elected to use the software as a service.

Even if the user becomes an operator, and deploys a such clone, it
is devoid of their own data, devoid of other users, of connections
to other services, of infrastructure scalability, pipelines, monitoring,
backups, ... you name it.

In any case, users are certainly not able to iterate on their changes
to a service against their real world use cases.

What's more, without true Open Source principles, we are missing a
way to have a community develop with a center of gravity around
the service itself. This leads to companies
[forking the service](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/stepping-up-for-a-truly-open-source-elasticsearch)
in a way that typical open source projects with a true community
are resilient to.

I believe that if we enable contributions to services, we reap
the advantages of true Open Source. That means enabling users to make a
change to a running service and experience that change themselves.

You still with me?

Yes, that means opening a pull request against a running service
and running that change before it's merged.

This is not as insane as it sounds.

It appears that every technique we need to enable such a capability
is already in use in modern deployment and operations methodology.
We just have to connect the dots.


# Why should I care?

I've been a part of Open Source for over 20 years now. Although I'm
just one contributor, together we've changed something fundamental
about the world. Our lives are too short, and software too complex,
to have one company or one individual invent everything from scratch.
So we work together across humanity to accomplish what no
individual team could. This is our legacy, and it has become
common place.

And yet there's a very simple principle that drives Open Source:

<div style="font-weight: bold; text-align: center;">
Open Source thrives when it converts some<br>small percentage of users into contributors.
</div>

If you interrupt that principle, you starve Open Source. Software as a
Service does just that: When someone else runs software for you, the
intuitive mechanisms for users to change that software are unavailable.

"But" you may say, "If the source code for that running service was **open**
then I could still change it."

Sure you could change the code in some component, but for any reasonably
complex Service you wouldn't be able to run your changes, experience your
changes against real world workflows, much less iterate on them until
they're good enough to share with others.

Services in the real world are much more than running some code.
And they're much more than deployment automation scripts. Services
are interconnected with other services, with data, APIs, legal
agreements, process, and users, infrastructure, and so much more.

Any non-toy Service is not reproducible.

In reality the threat here is far more fundamental: Users of services
cannot readily change something in the service not only because the
processes is operated by someone else ... but because such users of
a service have explicitly chosen not to be involved in operating
the software.

If the primary way to use Postgres was as a Service, then that (fabulous)
project would be starved for contributors. This is because the number
of contributors in a such a project are a function of some small
percentage of users deciding to try to make change.

As this mechanism for using software, as a service, takes over the world
the pool of users who can contribute to Open Source shrinks dramatically.

For a long time I saw this as a fundamental threat that would starve
Open Source. I was unable reconcile Software as a Service with a healthy
Open Source ecosystem.

But recently, I've become convinced that if we enable an effective
contribution model on a service, one that doesn't require that the users
themselves become operators of the service ... then we can reconcile this
threat and Open Source will thrive on services instead of be starved by them.


# You want me to do what!?

To enable contributions by users of a service, users that have explicitly
chosen not to operate the software themselves, we have to set up a process
by which they can make a change to a running service and experience that
change themselves before others do.

For example, a user of such a hypothetical service should be able to:

 1. Discover which component of a service to contribute to.

 2. Make a non-sensical change (like add a printf style log statement) or change the spelling of a word.

 3. Experience that change when they use the service, or when it acts on their data.

After discussing this with others, I firmly believe we have all the techniques we need,
whether canary deployments, load balancing, continuous delivery,
infrastructure as code, and so on. It's been hard to find a single
problem that an existing practice doesn't solve.

It turns out many engineering teams working have come to that same
conclusion. Rapid deployment of changes to services is a powerful
capability highly sought after. For example,
[GitHub deploys changes before they're merged](https://github.blog/2015-06-02-deploying-branches-to-github-com/).
Whereas
[Facebook rapidly deploys changes](https://engineering.fb.com/2017/08/31/web/rapid-release-at-massive-scale/)
to a few canary machines and scales each change up to production.
Everyone has their own version of continuous delivery. It's hard to
take an engineering team seriously if they haven't figured out how
their team members can get a change rapidly deployed.

As Open Source, I don't see us having pulled this off. Not yet.

Lets try to craft a playbook to achieve this basic capability
that drives Open Source: The ability to change code and interact
with that change ... on a service.

Commit message:

FIXUP changes after feedback from @martinpitt

content/technical/open-source-as-a-service.md, after:

Title: Your Service is not Open Source
Date: 2020-02-07 18:35
Tags: open source, technical
Slug: open-source-as-a-service
Category: Technical
Summary: Sharing the source code to your SaaS is insufficient. We effectively enable users to contribute to the a running service for it to be Open Source.

Sharing the source code to your SaaS is insufficient to make it
actually be Open Source. Sounds self-contradictory?

Most services that espouse "Open Source", do so by simply
[throwing the code over the wall](https://github.com/travis-ci/travis-ci).
It's better than nothing, but really misses the point that powers
Open Source: enabling users to make a change to the software
they're using.

Some other Open Source services, such as
[GitLab.com](https://about.gitlab.com/community/contribute/development/)
or [ElasticSearch](https://www.elastic.co/about/free-and-open) do include
the tools used to operate/deploy their service. Pause for applause 👏👏👏

But that's also insufficient to actually enable users to become
contributors effectively.

Much of the value of a service comes from things other than the code.
It comes from the infrastructure it runs on, the operational processes,
the monitoring, the backups, the metrics, the high availability, the
scalability. It comes from the network effect, with other users, with other
interconnected services, from legal agreements, and so on.

Any non-toy Service is not reproducible.

Launching a clone of the service in order to effectively contribute
is a high barrier. Certain kinds of contributions clearly are possible.
But contributors are essentially asked to "fork" the above non-code
aspects of the service in order to iterate on their changes against
their real world use cases.

What's more, without true Open Source principles, we are missing a
way to have a community develop with a center of gravity around
the service itself. This leads to companies
[forking the service](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/stepping-up-for-a-truly-open-source-elasticsearch)
in a way that typical open source projects with a true community
are resilient to.

I believe that if we enable contributions to services, we reap
the advantages of true Open Source. That means enabling users to make a
change to a running service and experience that change themselves.

You still with me?

Yes, that means opening a pull request against a running service
and running that change before it's merged.

This is not as insane as it sounds.

It appears that every technique we need to enable such a capability
is already in use in modern deployment and operations methodology.
We just have to connect the dots.


# Why should I care?

I've been a part of Open Source for over 20 years now. Although I'm
just one contributor, together we've changed something fundamental
about the world. Our lives are too short, and software too complex,
to have one company or one individual invent everything from scratch.
So we work together across humanity to accomplish what no
individual team could. This is our legacy, and it has become
common place.

And yet there's a very simple principle that drives Open Source:

<div style="font-weight: bold; text-align: center;">
Open Source thrives when it converts some<br>small percentage of users into contributors.
</div>

If you interrupt that principle, you starve Open Source. Software as a
Service does just that: When someone else runs software for you, the
intuitive mechanisms for users to change that software are unavailable.

"But" you may say, "If the source code for that running service was **open**
then I could still change it."

Sure you could change the code in some component, but for any reasonably
complex Service you wouldn't be able to run your changes, experience your
changes against real world workflows, much less iterate on them until
they're good enough to share with others.

In reality the threat here is far more fundamental: Users of services
cannot readily change something in the service not only because the
processes is operated by someone else ... but because such users of
a service have explicitly chosen not to be involved in operating
the software.

If the primary way to use [Postgres was as a Service](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/),
then that (fabulous) project would be starved for contributors. This is
because the number of contributors in a such a project are a function
of some small percentage of users deciding to try to make change.

As this mechanism for using software, as a service, takes over the world
the pool of users who can contribute to Open Source shrinks dramatically.

For a long time I saw this as a fundamental threat that would starve
Open Source. I was unable reconcile Software as a Service with a healthy
Open Source ecosystem.

But recently, I've become convinced that if we enable an effective
contribution model on a service, one that doesn't require that the users
themselves become operators of the service ... then we can reconcile this
threat and Open Source will thrive on services instead of be starved by them.


# You want me to do what!?

To enable contributions by users of a service, users that have explicitly
chosen not to operate the software themselves, we have to set up a process
by which they can make a change to a running service and experience that
change themselves before others do.

For example, a user of such a hypothetical service should be able to:

 1. Discover which component of a service to contribute to.

 2. Make a non-sensical change (like add a printf style log statement) or change the spelling of a word.

 3. Experience that change when they use the service, or when it acts on their data.

After discussing this with others, I firmly believe we have all the techniques we need,
whether canary deployments, load balancing, continuous delivery,
infrastructure as code, and so on. It's been hard to find a single
problem that an existing practice doesn't solve.

It turns out many engineering teams working have come to that same
conclusion. Rapid deployment of changes to services is a powerful
capability highly sought after. For example,
[GitHub deploys changes before they're merged](https://github.blog/2015-06-02-deploying-branches-to-github-com/).
Whereas
[Facebook rapidly deploys changes](https://engineering.fb.com/2017/08/31/web/rapid-release-at-massive-scale/)
to a few canary machines and scales each change up to production.
Everyone has their own version of continuous delivery. It's hard to
take an engineering team seriously if they haven't figured out how
their team members can get a change rapidly deployed.

As Open Source, we have all the ingredients to have a decisive
advantage here. To effectively collaborate on services with
contributors across humanity.

Lets try to craft a playbook to achieve this basic capability
that drives Open Source: The ability to change code and interact
with that change ... on a service.
